README.md, before:

# jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension

![GitHub Actions](https://github.com/stellarshenson/jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)
[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/jupyterlab-parquet-viewer-extension.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/jupyterlab-parquet-viewer-extension/)
![PyPI downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/jupyterlab-parquet-viewer-extension?label=PyPI%20downloads)
![JL4 Ready](https://img.shields.io/badge/Jupyterlab%204-ready-blue)

JupyterLab extension for browsing Parquet files with filtering, sorting, and search capabilities. Opens Parquet files directly in JupyterLab without writing code, providing spreadsheet-like interaction for columnar data.

![Parquet Viewer](.resources/screenshot.png)

## Features

- Progressive loading (500 rows initially, expands on scroll) for responsive performance with large files
- Column sorting with three-state toggle (ascending, descending, off)
- Per-column filtering with substring or regex pattern matching
- Case-insensitive search option
- Numerical filters supporting comparison operators (`>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, `=`)
- File statistics display (column count, row count, file size)
- Clear filters functionality to reset all active filters
- Column headers showing field names with simplified datatype indicators
- Automatic column width optimization
- Server-side processing maintains performance with large datasets
- Read-only interface focused on data exploration

## Installation

Requires JupyterLab 4.0.0 or higher.

```bash
pip install jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

Uninstall:
```bash
pip uninstall jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

## Troubleshooting

Verify both extension components are enabled if the extension doesn't work:

```bash
# Check server extension
jupyter server extension list

# Check frontend extension
jupyter labextension list
```

Both commands should show `jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension` as enabled. Reinstall if either is missing or disabled.

## Development Setup

Requires NodeJS for building TypeScript frontend. Uses `jlpm` (JupyterLab's pinned yarn version) for consistency.

**Initial setup:**

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install in editable mode
pip install --editable ".[dev,test]"

# Link frontend and enable server extension
jupyter labextension develop . --overwrite
jupyter server extension enable jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

**Development workflow:**

Use two terminals for efficient development:
- Terminal 1: `jlpm watch` (auto-rebuild on file changes)
- Terminal 2: `jupyter lab` (run development instance)

Refresh browser after changes to see updates. Build generates source maps for debugging.

Enable deeper debugging with unminimized JupyterLab build:
```bash
jupyter lab build --minimize=False
```

**Removing development installation:**

```bash
jupyter server extension disable jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
pip uninstall jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

Then delete the `jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension` symlink from your `labextensions` directory (find with `jupyter labextension list`).

## Testing

Three-tier testing strategy: Python backend, TypeScript frontend, and integration tests.

**Python tests** (pytest with coverage):
```bash
pip install -e ".[test]"
jupyter labextension develop . --overwrite
pytest -vv -r ap --cov jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

**TypeScript tests** (Jest):
```bash
jlpm
jlpm test
```

**Integration tests** (Playwright + Galata):
Simulates real user interactions to validate complete workflows. See [ui-tests README](./ui-tests/README.md) for detailed instructions.

## Packaging and Release

See [RELEASE.md](RELEASE.md) for instructions on building distributable packages and publishing releases.

Commit message:

docs: emphasize core viewing capability as primary feature
Reorganized README to highlight that the extension's most important feature
is providing a simple way to view and browse Parquet files:

- Updated introduction to lead with "View and browse Parquet files directly"
- Emphasized "Double-click any .parquet file" and "no code required"
- Reorganized features into two clear sections:
  - Core viewing and navigation (primary features)
  - Advanced filtering and sorting (secondary features)
- Made it immediately clear this is a viewer/browser first, with filtering
  and sorting as bonus capabilities

Updated journal with entry #15 documenting CI/CD workflow synchronization
and README reorganization.

README.md, after:

# jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension

![GitHub Actions](https://github.com/stellarshenson/jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)
[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/jupyterlab-parquet-viewer-extension.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/jupyterlab-parquet-viewer-extension/)
![PyPI downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/jupyterlab-parquet-viewer-extension?label=PyPI%20downloads)
![JL4 Ready](https://img.shields.io/badge/Jupyterlab%204-ready-blue)

View and browse Parquet files directly in JupyterLab. Double-click any .parquet file to open it in a simple, spreadsheet-like table view - no code required. Navigate through your data, inspect values, and explore the structure of your columnar data files.

![Parquet Viewer](.resources/screenshot.png)

## Features

**Core viewing and navigation:**
- Simple table display showing your Parquet data in familiar spreadsheet format
- Column headers with field names and simplified datatype indicators
- Progressive loading - starts with 500 rows, automatically loads more as you scroll
- Automatic column width optimization for readability
- File statistics (column count, row count, file size) at a glance
- Handles large files efficiently with server-side processing

**Advanced filtering and sorting:**
- Column sorting with three-state toggle (ascending, descending, off)
- Per-column filtering with substring or regex pattern matching
- Case-insensitive search option
- Numerical filters supporting comparison operators (`>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, `=`)
- Clear filters functionality to reset all active filters
- Multiple filters work together to narrow down results

## Installation

Requires JupyterLab 4.0.0 or higher.

```bash
pip install jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

Uninstall:
```bash
pip uninstall jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

## Troubleshooting

Verify both extension components are enabled if the extension doesn't work:

```bash
# Check server extension
jupyter server extension list

# Check frontend extension
jupyter labextension list
```

Both commands should show `jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension` as enabled. Reinstall if either is missing or disabled.

## Development Setup

Requires NodeJS for building TypeScript frontend. Uses `jlpm` (JupyterLab's pinned yarn version) for consistency.

**Initial setup:**

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install in editable mode
pip install --editable ".[dev,test]"

# Link frontend and enable server extension
jupyter labextension develop . --overwrite
jupyter server extension enable jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

**Development workflow:**

Use two terminals for efficient development:
- Terminal 1: `jlpm watch` (auto-rebuild on file changes)
- Terminal 2: `jupyter lab` (run development instance)

Refresh browser after changes to see updates. Build generates source maps for debugging.

Enable deeper debugging with unminimized JupyterLab build:
```bash
jupyter lab build --minimize=False
```

**Removing development installation:**

```bash
jupyter server extension disable jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
pip uninstall jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

Then delete the `jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension` symlink from your `labextensions` directory (find with `jupyter labextension list`).

## Testing

Three-tier testing strategy: Python backend, TypeScript frontend, and integration tests.

**Python tests** (pytest with coverage):
```bash
pip install -e ".[test]"
jupyter labextension develop . --overwrite
pytest -vv -r ap --cov jupyterlab_parquet_viewer_extension
```

**TypeScript tests** (Jest):
```bash
jlpm
jlpm test
```

**Integration tests** (Playwright + Galata):
Simulates real user interactions to validate complete workflows. See [ui-tests README](./ui-tests/README.md) for detailed instructions.

## Packaging and Release

See [RELEASE.md](RELEASE.md) for instructions on building distributable packages and publishing releases.
